PMID	Species	Disease	Tissue_type	Evidence	Weight	Gene_name	Cell_name	context_background
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Cross-platform single cell analysis of kidney development shows stromal cells express Gdnf	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Cross-platform single cell analysis of kidney development shows stromal cells express Gdnf, Developmental Biology,	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	Cross-platform single cell analysis of kidney development shows stromal cells express Gdnf
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	GUDMAP also defined gene expression patterns of FACS purified specific cell types using transgenic mice with GFP reporter expression driven by Meis1 (stromal cells) (Brunskill and Potter, 2012a), Tie2 (endothelial cells) (Brunskill and Potter, 2010), Mafb (podocytes) (Brunskill et al., 2011), and Crym (cap mesenchyme) (Brunskill and Potter, 2012b).	2	Mafb & Crym & Meis1	FAC & stromal cell & endothelial cell & podocyte	Many compartments, however, include multiple cell types, confounding interpretation of results.. It was not clear which cell type expressed which gene.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Unexpectedly, we show that a subset of nephrogenic zone stromal cells strongly express Gdnf, a key driver of ureteric bud branching morphogenesis, previously thought to be expressed only by cap mesenchyme progenitor cells.	2	Gdnf	nephrogenic zone & stromal cell & cap mesenchyme	The process of multilineage priming was confirmed and extended to additional stages of nephrogenesis.. We also examined the growth factors and receptors expressed by the different cell types and defined potential compartment crosstalk interactions.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	While several transcriptionally distinct cell populations were evident from these unsupervised analyses, such as Endothelial (Icam2 positive), Cap mesenchyme (Crym positive) and Uteric tip (Ret positive), a precise 1-to-1 mapping of distinct cell type predictions was not obtained.	2	Crym & Ret & Icam2	Endothelial	Generally similar states were captured by the Fluidigm and Chromium platforms as determined by t-SNE visualization, gene set enrichment analysis against the 16 Drop-Seq identified population markers and expression of previously defined embryonic kidney cell-type or compartmental specific marker genes ( Fig. 2B-C ) .. Importantly, no new additional populations could be identified using the software Seurat ( Macosko et al., 2015 ) applied to the Drop-Seq, Chromium or Fluidigm data ( data not shown ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	While several transcriptionally distinct cell populations were evident from these unsupervised analyses, such as Endothelial (Icam2 positive), Cap mesenchyme (Crym positive) and Uteric tip (Ret positive), a precise 1-to-1 mapping of distinct cell type predictions was not obtained.	2	Crym & Ret & Icam2	Endothelial	Generally similar states were captured by the Fluidigm and Chromium platforms as determined by t-SNE visualization, gene set enrichment analysis against the 16 Drop-Seq identified population markers and expression of previously defined embryonic kidney cell-type or compartmental specific marker genes ( Fig. 2B-C ) .. Importantly, no new additional populations could be identified using the software Seurat ( Macosko et al., 2015 ) applied to the Drop-Seq, Chromium or Fluidigm data ( data not shown ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	These analyses validate the specificity of Rprm expression in the ureteric tip, Pcp4 in podocytes, and Spock2 in the cap mesenchyme (Fig. 5 A-C).	2	Spock2 & Rprm & Pcp4	podocyte	Although we were unable to identify marker genes obtained by a single-platform that have well-documented cell specificity in the literature, many of the population specific genes identified were predicted to correspond to assigned population labels by ToppGene analysis ( Table S3 ) .. To evaluate the specificity of the scRNA-Seq predictions, we validated the expression patterns of multiple predicted markers by using immunofluorescence, the Allen Brain Atlas and GUDMAP public resources.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Penk and Alx1 showed strongest expression in the stromal cells flanking the collecting ducts, while Col6a1 showed a somewhat complementary expression pattern in the medullary stroma more distant from the collecting ducts (Fig. 5 F-H).	2	Alx1 & Penk & Col6a1	stromal cell	The c14 compartment contains the nephrogenic zone stroma cells, although genes associated with these cells show some variation in expression domains.. While CRABP1 is restricted to the nephrogenic zone stroma, Gpc3 was expressed at the highest level within the nephrogenic zone stroma but also at a lower level in the underlying cortical stroma region ( Fig. 5 D,E ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	For example the interaction between SLIT2 in the collecting ducts and ROBO2 in the CM has been shown to be necessary for proper kidney development (Grieshammer et al., 2004).	2	SLIT2 & ROBO2	cap mesenchyme	In addition, the Cap Mesenchyme nephron progenitors show possible cross talk with the comma and S-shaped bodies through Rspondin1,3 or Lgr4,5 interactions.. Notably, while many of these cell-cell interactions are novel, multiple of these predicted interactions have been previously demonstrated.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	It has also been shown that Robo2 is expressed within the CM and Slit2 is expressed within the collecting ducts (Grieshammer et al., 2004).	2	Slit2 & Robo2	cap mesenchyme	For example the interaction between SLIT2 in the collecting ducts and ROBO2 in the CM has been shown to be necessary for proper kidney development ( Grieshammer et al., 2004 ) .. In Slit2 null mice multiple ureteric budding events occur as opposed to a normal single budding event.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Surprisingly, from the cell-interaction analyses, Gdnf is predicted to have the most consistent and specific expression in nephrogenic zone stromal cells.	2	Gdnf	nephrogenic zone & stromal cell	In Slit2 null mice multiple ureteric budding events occur as opposed to a normal single budding event.. It has also been shown that Robo2 is expressed within the CM and Slit2 is expressed within the collecting ducts ( Grieshammer et al., 2004 ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	First, the three scRNA-Seq technologies, Drop-Seq, Fluidigm and Chromium, all showed expression of Gdnf in stromal cells, as well as cap mesenchyme, providing cross platform validation (Fig. 4C).	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	This was surprising because the Cap Mesenchyme has historically been considered the sole source of GDNF ( Dressler, 2009;McMahon, 2016 ) .. We confirmed this unexpected finding in several ways.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	An expanded view heatmap focusing on selected stromal and cap mesenchyme genes further illustrates the robust Gdnf expression in some stromal cells, often exceeding levels seen in cap mesenchyme cells (Fig. 7).	2	Gdnf	stromal cell & cap mesenchyme & stromal	We confirmed this unexpected finding in several ways.. First, the three scRNA-Seq technologies, Drop-Seq, Fluidigm and Chromium, all showed expression of Gdnf in stromal cells, as well as cap mesenchyme, providing cross platform validation ( Fig. 4C ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	To further confirm the expression of Gdnf in stromal cells we next examined public gene expression resources.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	First, the three scRNA-Seq technologies, Drop-Seq, Fluidigm and Chromium, all showed expression of Gdnf in stromal cells, as well as cap mesenchyme, providing cross platform validation ( Fig. 4C ) .. An expanded view heatmap focusing on selected stromal and cap mesenchyme genes further illustrates the robust Gdnf expression in some stromal cells, often exceeding levels seen in cap mesenchyme cells ( Fig. 7 ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Using the Allen Brain Atlas public resource (http://www.brain-map.org) in situ hybridization dataset we observed, as expected, Six2 expression primarily in the cap mesenchyme cell population located overlying and immediately flanking the branching ureteric tips at E13.5 (Fig. 8).	2	Six2	cap mesenchyme	An expanded view heatmap focusing on selected stromal and cap mesenchyme genes further illustrates the robust Gdnf expression in some stromal cells, often exceeding levels seen in cap mesenchyme cells ( Fig. 7 ) .. To further confirm the expression of Gdnf in stromal cells we next examined public gene expression resources.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Further, the expression domain of Gdnf appeared to extend deeper than that of Six2, in some cases likely including stromal cells, based on position (Fig. 8).	2	Gdnf & Six2	stromal cell	Using the Allen Brain Atlas public resource ( http: or or www.brain-map.org ) in situ hybridization dataset we observed, as expected, Six2 expression primarily in the cap mesenchyme cell population located overlying and immediately flanking the branching ureteric tips at E13.5 ( Fig. 8 ) .. Gdnf showed an overlapping gene expression pattern, but with weaker expression in the cells overlying the ureteric bud and stronger expression in the cells flanking the ureteric bud.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Of interest, the GUDMAP dataset showed the strongest Gdnf expression in the Meis1-GFP FACS purified stromal cell population, with cap mesenchyme cells showing the second highest expression.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell population & cap mesenchyme	Further, the expression domain of Gdnf appeared to extend deeper than that of Six2, in some cases likely including stromal cells, based on position ( Fig. 8 ) .. This result was further confirmed using the GUDMAP gene expression resource ( GUDMAP.org ) ( Brunskill et al., 2008 ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	GUDMAP therefore further verifies that Gdnf is expressed in both cap mesenchyme and stromal cells.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	This result was further confirmed using the GUDMAP gene expression resource ( GUDMAP.org ) ( Brunskill et al., 2008 ) .. Of interest, the GUDMAP dataset showed the strongest Gdnf expression in the Meis1-GFP FACS purified stromal cell population, with cap mesenchyme cells showing the second highest expression.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	To still further validate the expression of Gdnf by stromal cells we carried out double Gdnf in situ hybridization coupled with SIX2 or MEIS1 IHC.	2	Gdnf & MEIS1 & SIX2	stromal cell	Of interest, the GUDMAP dataset showed the strongest Gdnf expression in the Meis1-GFP FACS purified stromal cell population, with cap mesenchyme cells showing the second highest expression.. GUDMAP therefore further verifies that Gdnf is expressed in both cap mesenchyme and stromal cells.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Consistent with the Drop-Seq, Fluidigm and Chromium scRNA-Seq data, the Allen Brain Atlas in situ hybridization data, and the GUDMAP FACS/RNA-Seq data, we observed stromal cell expression of Gdnf in cells that were not SIX2 positive, and were therefore likely stromal cells (Fig. 9D,E,E').	2	Gdnf & SIX2	stromal cell	GUDMAP therefore further verifies that Gdnf is expressed in both cap mesenchyme and stromal cells.. To still further validate the expression of Gdnf by stromal cells we carried out double Gdnf in situ hybridization coupled with SIX2 or MEIS1 IHC.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	We further confirmed this by Gdnf in situ hybridization coupled with IHC for MEIS1, a specific marker of the stromal lineage.	2	Gdnf & MEIS1	stromal lineage	To still further validate the expression of Gdnf by stromal cells we carried out double Gdnf in situ hybridization coupled with SIX2 or MEIS1 IHC.. Consistent with the Drop-Seq, Fluidigm and Chromium scRNA-Seq data, the Allen Brain Atlas in situ hybridization data, and the GUDMAP FACS or RNA-Seq data, we observed stromal cell expression of Gdnf in cells that were not SIX2 positive, and were therefore likely stromal cells ( Fig. 9D,E,E' ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	We observed that some of the MEIS1 positive cells indeed showed robust expression of Gdnf (Fig. 9F,G,G').	2	Gdnf & MEIS1	positive cell	Consistent with the Drop-Seq, Fluidigm and Chromium scRNA-Seq data, the Allen Brain Atlas in situ hybridization data, and the GUDMAP FACS or RNA-Seq data, we observed stromal cell expression of Gdnf in cells that were not SIX2 positive, and were therefore likely stromal cells ( Fig. 9D,E,E' ) .. We further confirmed this by Gdnf in situ hybridization coupled with IHC for MEIS1, a specific marker of the stromal lineage.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	As predicted by the Allen Brain Atlas, these Gdnf expressing stromal cells were often located near the cap mesenchyme, but extending deeper into the kidney.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	We further confirmed this by Gdnf in situ hybridization coupled with IHC for MEIS1, a specific marker of the stromal lineage.. We observed that some of the MEIS1 positive cells indeed showed robust expression of Gdnf ( Fig. 9F,G,G' ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	The stromal cells flanking and immediately beneath the branching UB tips showed the strongest Gdnf expression.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	We observed that some of the MEIS1 positive cells indeed showed robust expression of Gdnf ( Fig. 9F,G,G' ) .. As predicted by the Allen Brain Atlas, these Gdnf expressing stromal cells were often located near the cap mesenchyme, but extending deeper into the kidney.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	These combined results suggest that stromal cells might contribute to GDNF signaling.	2	GDNF	stromal cell	As predicted by the Allen Brain Atlas, these Gdnf expressing stromal cells were often located near the cap mesenchyme, but extending deeper into the kidney.. The stromal cells flanking and immediately beneath the branching UB tips showed the strongest Gdnf expression.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	It is interesting to note that mutation of the transcription factor Foxd1, expressed in the stromal lineage, results in severely reduced ureteric bud branching (Hatini et al., 1996).	2	Foxd1	stromal lineage	GDNF interacts with the Ret or Gfra1 receptors on the ureteric tips to help drive its branching morphogenesis.. Germline mutation of Gdnf, Ret, or Gfra1 results in renal agenesis, with failure of ureteric bud ( Olsson et al. ) formation ( Costantini and Shakya, 2006;Skinner et al., 2008 ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	It would be interesting, in the future, to determine the effects of stromal lineage specific deletion of Gdnf expression.	2	Gdnf	stromal lineage	It was hypothesized that the cause could be an "as yet unidentified ligand for the Ret receptor…" produced by the stroma.. Our results, however, suggest that the Foxd1 mutation could result in reduced GDNF expression by the stroma.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	For example a small percent of cap mesenchyme cells expressed Mafb, a marker of differentiated podocytes.	2	Mafb	podocyte & cap mesenchyme	This study used Fluidigm C1 96 cell microfluidics or robotics technology, examining a relatively small number of cells.. Of interest, we observed that the early cap mesenchyme cells already showed stochastic expression of genes associated with differentiated cell types.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Of interest it was recently shown that mutation of the Pax2 gene in cap mesenchyme breaks this lineage boundary, causing the nephron progenitor cells to convert to the stromal lineage (Naiman et al., 2017).	2	Pax2	nephron progenitor cell & lineage & stromal lineage	The current dogma is that differentiating kidney cells make a similar binary decision early in development, choosing either the stromal or nephrogenic lineage.. This dogma is based largely on lineage tracing studies, which show that Six2-Cre labels the nephron lineage ( Kobayashi et al., 2008 ) while Foxd1-Cre labels the stromal lineage ( Kobayashi et al., 2014 ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	For example, a fraction of cells that otherwise show very strong stromal type gene expression patterns nevertheless also show expression of Six2, a nephron progenitor marker, and similarly a significant fraction of cells that cluster well with nephron progenitors nevertheless express Foxd1, a classic marker of the stromal lineage (Fig. 7).	2	Six2 & Foxd1	stromal type gene expression & nephron progenitor marker & stromal lineage & nephron progenitor	In this report we show that the nephrogenic zone stroma, as well as cap mesenchyme, both express Gdnf, blurring the functional boundary between these two compartments.. The scRNA-Seq data for E14.5 wild type developing kidneys consistently shows some clouding of the nephron or stromal lineage boundary.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Surprisingly, we find that stromal cells, as well as cap mesenchyme nephron progenitors, express Gdnf, a key driver of branching morphogenesis of the collecting duct system.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell & cap mesenchyme	As such, we believe the presented bioinformatics workflow has the strong potential to be applied in numerous ongoing large-scale efforts to map and compare sample heterogeneity across diverse samples, laboratories and analytical technologies.. The results provide a global definition of the gene expression patterns of the progenitor and multiple differentiating cell types present.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	MCD: medullary collecting duct, CD: collecting duct, UT: ureteric tip, LOH: loop of Henle, DCSB, distal comma shaped body, Pod: podocyte, MSSB: mid S-shaped body, PT: proximal tubule, CM: cap mesenchyme, Endo: Endothelium, NZS: nephrogenic zone stroma, CS: cortical stroma, MS: medullary stroma.	2	CS & MS	podocyte & Pod & Endothelium	Receptors are labeled in red and ligands are labeled in blue.. Interconnecting lines are color coded to match the heat map cell clusters.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Heatmaps using data from all three scRNA-seq platforms show Gdnf expression by stromal cells.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	Figure 7.. Gdnf expression in the nephrogenic zone stroma.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Surprisingly, many cells that strongly clustered with the stromal cell compartment also showed robust Gdnf expression.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	Six2, Cited1 and Crym are markers of cap mesenchyme ( CM ) , while Meis1, Foxd1, Crabp1 and Aldh1a2 are expressed in stroma.. As expected, cells that clustered with cap mesenchyme as determined by these markers as well as complete gene expression signatures often showed expression of Gdnf.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	CD: Collecting duct, UT: Ureteric Tip, LOH: Loop of Henle, RV: Renal vesicle, DCSB: Distal comma shaped body, Pod: podocyte, PT: Proximal Tubule, PA: Pre-tubular aggregate, CM: Cap mesenchyme, Endo: Endothelium, NZS: Nephrogenic Stroma, CS: Cortical Stroma.	2	CS	podocyte & Pod & Endothelium	Text to the left of each heatmap indicates the statistical enrichment of genes from the Drop-Seq ICGS analysis for the 16 identified populations ( MarkerFinder ) using the embedded gene-set enrichment analysis tool GO-Elite in AltAnalyze.. B-C ) t-SNE plot derived from the ICGS heatmaps in panel A, where each dot represents individual cells colored according to its B ) ICGS cluster annotation or C ) prior established population specific genes.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	A: Rprm, UT: ureteric tip B: Pcp4, Pod: Podocytes, C: Spock2, CM: cap mesenchyme, D: Gpc3, NZS: Nephrogenic zone stroma, E: CRABP1, NZS, F: Penk, CS: Cortical Stroma, G: Alx1, CS, H: Col6a1, MS: Medullary stroma.	2	Rprm & MS & Col6a1 & Gpc3 & CRABP1 & Penk & Pcp4 & CS & Alx1 & Spock2	Medullary stroma & Nephrogenic zone & Pod & Podocyte & ureteric tip B	Figure 5 .5Figure 5.. Cell type specific gene expression validations.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Gdnf expression in stromal cells.	2	Gdnf	stromal cell	Arrowheads point to regions overlying ureteric tips, showing low levels of Gdnf expression.. Figure 9 .9Figure 9.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	G: Gdnf ISH and MEIS1 (IHC) double staining, showing the presence of Gdnf, MEIS1 double positive stroma cells.	2	Gdnf & MEIS1	positive stroma cell	E': 40X view of Gdnf positive, SIX2 negative cells.. F: Gdnf ISH alone ( 20X ) .
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	G': 40x view of Gdnf positive, MEIS1 positive cells.	2	Gdnf & MEIS1	positive cell & Gdnf positive	F: Gdnf ISH alone ( 20X ) .. G: Gdnf ISH and MEIS1 ( IHC ) double staining, showing the presence of Gdnf, MEIS1 double positive stroma cells.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Dashed lines outline the SIX2 positive CM.	2	SIX2	Dashed line	G': 40x view of Gdnf positive, MEIS1 positive cells.. Arrowheads point to cells positive for Gdnf and negative for SIX2.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Black double arrowheads point to Gdnf negative, MEIS1 positive cells below the nephrogenic zone.	2	Gdnf & MEIS1	positive cell	Arrowheads point to cells positive for Gdnf and negative for SIX2.. Dashed lines outline the SIX2 positive CM.
29183737	MOUSE	normal	kidney|mesenchyme|renal vesicle|nephron	Highlights Single cell RNA-seq of over 8,000 E14.5 developing kidney cells  Stromal cells, as well as cap mesenchyme, express GDNF  Comparison of 10X Genomics, Drop-Seq and Fluidigm 800 cell IFC single cell RNA-Seq  Multilineage priming at many stages of nephrogenesis	2	GDNF	Stromal cell & kidney cell	The early progenitor CM cells show stochastic expression of markers of multiple lineages.. The MSSB cells are more committed and show elevated expression of proximal tubule associated genes and reduced expression of podocyte marker genes.
