PMID	Title	Date	Journal	Species	Disease	Tissue_type	Evidence	Weight	Gene_name	Cell_name	context_background	Evidence_clean
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Anti-Ki-67 (1:100, Abcam, Cat#: ab15580), anti-BAX (1:200, Abcam, Cat#: ab32503) were used for immunohistochemistry.	2.0	Cat	Cat#	Paraffin sections were sequentially dewaxed, hydrated, and antigen repaired.. After blocking endogenous peroxidase activity with hydrogen peroxide for 10 minutes, tissue isolates were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C.	anti-ki-67 anti-bax use for immunohistochemistry
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Anti-Ki-67 (1:100, Abcam, Cat#: ab15580), anti-BAX (1:200, Abcam, Cat#: ab32503) were used for immunohistochemistry.	2.0	Cat	Cat#	Paraffin sections were sequentially dewaxed, hydrated, and antigen repaired.. After blocking endogenous peroxidase activity with hydrogen peroxide for 10 minutes, tissue isolates were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C.	anti-ki-67 anti-bax use for immunohistochemistry
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Fibroblasts, the central cells of fibrosis, had a reduced proportion after treatment and communication with other cells was impaired, particularly in the FGF2 signaling pathway.	2.6	FGF2	Fibroblast	Therefore, we applied scRNA-seq to capture transcriptional profile changes in keloids after TAC+5-FU injection treatment and concentrated on altered pathways involved in the fibrotic process, which could provide new molecular-level insights for understanding this treatment option.. In this study, we systematically evaluated the cellular composition alterations in keloids after TAC+5-FU injection treatment.	fibroblast central cell of fibrosis have reduce proportion treatment communication cell impaired particularly in signaling pathway
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	The FGF2 signaling pathway among fibroblasts was significantly inhibited in keloids treated with TAC+5-FU, suggesting that it may be a potential pathway target.	2.6	FGF2	fibroblast & TAC+5-FU	Fibroblasts, the central cells of fibrosis, had a reduced proportion after treatment and communication with other cells was impaired, particularly in the FGF2 signaling pathway.. FGF2 has a regulatory role in the formation of fibrotic disease, and aberrant expression of the FGF2 signaling pathway was reported in lung, liver, kidney, myocardial and skin fibrosis ( 43-45 ) .	signaling pathway fibroblast significantly inhibit in keloid treat tac+5-fu suggest potential pathway target
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Treatment of mesenchymal fibroblasts with neutralizing antibodies to POSTN, a marker gene for mesenchymal fibroblasts, significantly inhibited collagen synthesis (46).	2.6	POSTN	mesenchymal fibroblast	Moreover, the trend of differentiation toward mesenchymal fibroblasts was suppressed in treated keloids in pseudotime analysis.. Mesenchymal fibroblasts are highly expressed in genes related to ossification and osteogenesis and are a remarkably increased fibroblast subtype in keloids compared to normal scars ( 27 ) .	treatment of mesenchymal fibroblast neutralize antibody marker gene for mesenchymal fibroblast significantly inhibit collagen synthesis 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Additionally, the expression of secretoglobulin family members SCGB2A2, SCGB1D2 and SCGB1B2P was upregulated after treatment in the T cell expression profile.	2.0	SCGB1B2P & SCGB2A2 & SCGB1D2	T cell	M2-type macrophages are essential cells that play a role in inducing fibrotic disease by secreting growth factors and regulating fibroblast proliferation and extracellular matrix synthesis ( 52 ) .. Our results also identified macrophages in the subpopulation identification of the mononuclear phagocyte system and had the characteristics of M2-type macrophages, which is consistent with previous reports.	additionally expression of secretoglobulin family member upregulate treatment in t cell expression profile
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Fibroblasts, the central cells of fibrosis, had a reduced proportion after treatment and communication with other cells was impaired, particularly in the FGF2 signaling pathway.	2.6	FGF2	Fibroblast	Therefore, we applied scRNA-seq to capture transcriptional profile changes in keloids after TAC+5-FU injection treatment and concentrated on altered pathways involved in the fibrotic process, which could provide new molecular-level insights for understanding this treatment option.. In this study, we systematically evaluated the cellular composition alterations in keloids after TAC+5-FU injection treatment.	fibroblast central cell of fibrosis have reduce proportion treatment communication cell impaired particularly in signaling pathway
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	The FGF2 signaling pathway among fibroblasts was significantly inhibited in keloids treated with TAC+5-FU, suggesting that it may be a potential pathway target.	2.6	FGF2	fibroblast & TAC+5-FU	Fibroblasts, the central cells of fibrosis, had a reduced proportion after treatment and communication with other cells was impaired, particularly in the FGF2 signaling pathway.. FGF2 has a regulatory role in the formation of fibrotic disease, and aberrant expression of the FGF2 signaling pathway was reported in lung, liver, kidney, myocardial and skin fibrosis ( 43-45 ) .	signaling pathway fibroblast significantly inhibit in keloid treat tac+5-fu suggest potential pathway target
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Treatment of mesenchymal fibroblasts with neutralizing antibodies to POSTN, a marker gene for mesenchymal fibroblasts, significantly inhibited collagen synthesis (46).	2.6	POSTN	mesenchymal fibroblast	Moreover, the trend of differentiation toward mesenchymal fibroblasts was suppressed in treated keloids in pseudotime analysis.. Mesenchymal fibroblasts are highly expressed in genes related to ossification and osteogenesis and are a remarkably increased fibroblast subtype in keloids compared to normal scars ( 27 ) .	treatment of mesenchymal fibroblast neutralize antibody marker gene for mesenchymal fibroblast significantly inhibit collagen synthesis 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Additionally, the expression of secretoglobulin family members SCGB2A2, SCGB1D2 and SCGB1B2P was upregulated after treatment in the T cell expression profile.	2.0	SCGB1B2P & SCGB2A2 & SCGB1D2	T cell	M2-type macrophages are essential cells that play a role in inducing fibrotic disease by secreting growth factors and regulating fibroblast proliferation and extracellular matrix synthesis ( 52 ) .. Our results also identified macrophages in the subpopulation identification of the mononuclear phagocyte system and had the characteristics of M2-type macrophages, which is consistent with previous reports.	additionally expression of secretoglobulin family member upregulate treatment in t cell expression profile
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Expression of pro-inflammatory fibroblast markers (CCL19, CXCL2, CXCL3) was concentrated in cluster 2 (Figure S2A), where the upregulated genes were significantly associated with inflammatory response (Figure 2C).	2.6	CXCL2 & CCL19 & CXCL3	fibroblast	To determine the specific functions of the different clusters, we performed enrichment analysis of upregulated genes ( Figure 2C ) and examined the expression of markers ( Figure S2A ) for the four identified fibroblast subpopulations ( mesenchymal fibroblasts, pro-inflammatory fibroblasts, secretory-papillary fibroblasts and secretory-reticular fibroblasts ) ( 27 ) .. Cluster 1 was characterized by the expression of genes associated with epidermal development ( Figure 2C ) including KRTDAP, KRT1, and KRT10 ( Figure S2B ) .	expression of pro-inflammatory fibroblast marker concentrate in cluster upregulate gene significantly associate inflammatory response 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Secretory-reticular fibroblast markers (WISP2, SLPI, TSPAN8) were predominantly expressed in cluster 3, and secretory-papillary fibroblast markers (APCDD1, ID1, WIF1) were mostly expressed in cluster 8 (Figure S2A).	2.6	ID1 & WIF1 & SLPI & TSPAN8 & APCDD1	secretory-papillary fibroblast marker	Cluster 1 was characterized by the expression of genes associated with epidermal development ( Figure 2C ) including KRTDAP, KRT1, and KRT10 ( Figure S2B ) .. Expression of pro-inflammatory fibroblast markers ( CCL19, CXCL2, CXCL3 ) was concentrated in cluster 2 ( Figure S2A ) , where the upregulated genes were significantly associated with inflammatory response ( Figure 2C ) .	secretory-reticular fibroblast marker predominantly express in cluster secretory-papillary fibroblast marker express in cluster 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Mesenchymal fibroblast markers ASPN and POSTN were mainly expressed in clusters 5 and 6, and the results of functional enrichment analysis of clusters 5 and 6 showed correlation with extracellular matrix tissue and collagen fibril tissue (Figure 2C).	2.6	POSTN & ASPN	Mesenchymal fibroblast & Mesenchymal fibroblast marker	Expression of pro-inflammatory fibroblast markers ( CCL19, CXCL2, CXCL3 ) was concentrated in cluster 2 ( Figure S2A ) , where the upregulated genes were significantly associated with inflammatory response ( Figure 2C ) .. Secretory-reticular fibroblast markers ( WISP2, SLPI, TSPAN8 ) were predominantly expressed in cluster 3, and secretory-papillary fibroblast markers ( APCDD1, ID1, WIF1 ) were mostly expressed in cluster 8 ( Figure S2A ) .	mesenchymal fibroblast marker mainly express in cluster result of functional enrichment analysis of cluster correlation extracellular matrix tissue collagen fibril tissue 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Fibroblasts in keloids followed a “state1-state2-state4” trajectory, with more fibroblasts differentiating towards mesenchymal clusters 5 and 6 than in normal skins (Figure 2E), accompanied by increased expression of KRT1, KRT10 (Figure S2C), and POSTN (Figure 2F).	2.6	KRT10 & POSTN & KRT1	mesenchymal clusters 5 & Fibroblast & fibroblast	The results were consistent with clinical observations that keloids treated with TAC+5-FU experienced local remission of inflammation and atrophy of the dermis and epidermis.. To further explore the differentiation trajectory underlying the variations in fibroblast proportions, we performed a pseudo-time analysis using Monocle2 and identified five states ( Figure 2D ) .	fibroblast in keloid follow state1-state2-state4 trajectory fibroblast differentiate mesenchymal cluster in normal skin accompany by increase expression of 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	The fibroblasts in the PK group exhibited a novel direction of differentiation (from state 1 to state 5/state 3), and the tendency to differentiate toward mesenchymal type clusters 5 (state 2) and 6 (state 4) was suppressed, during which the expression of inflammatory response-related genes C3, CXCL12, and CXCL14 was reduced (Figure S2C).	2.6	CXCL14 & CXCL12	keloid & fibroblast	To further explore the differentiation trajectory underlying the variations in fibroblast proportions, we performed a pseudo-time analysis using Monocle2 and identified five states ( Figure 2D ) .. Fibroblasts in keloids followed a “state1-state2-state4” trajectory, with more fibroblasts differentiating towards mesenchymal clusters 5 and 6 than in normal skins ( Figure 2E ) , accompanied by increased expression of KRT1, KRT10 ( Figure S2C ) , and POSTN ( Figure 2F ) .	fibroblast in post-treatment keloid group group exhibit novel direction of differentiation tendency differentiate mesenchymal type cluster expression of inflammatory response-related gene c3 reduce 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Increased expression of the pro-apoptotic gene BAX was observed in the PK group.	2.0	BAX	keloid	Cluster 10 was characterized by the expression of genes associated with mitosis and cell division.. A low level of Ki67 expression was observed in keloids after treatment, which was almost absent in normal skin and more abundant in keloids.	increase expression of pro-apoptotic gene observe in post-treatment keloid group group
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Expression of extracellular matrix protein FN1 and bone matrix protein OPN was identified in keloids, whereas these proteins were reduced in the PK group (Figure S3).	2.0	OPN & FN1	keloid	A low level of Ki67 expression was observed in keloids after treatment, which was almost absent in normal skin and more abundant in keloids.. Increased expression of the pro-apoptotic gene BAX was observed in the PK group.	expression of extracellular matrix protein bone matrix protein identify in keloid protein reduce in post-treatment keloid group group 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	These transcription factor-regulated network modules were mainly involved in chondrocyte development (SFRP2, COL11A1, FGF18, RUNX2), cell differentiation (MEF2C, FOXD1, NDE1, MDK, SOX18, TCF4, RXRG, CAMK2G, ZFPM1, SOX4), neuron differentiation (NAPA, MEF2C, CCND1, NNAT, RUNX3, RXRG, HDAC9, RUNX2), T cell differentiation (DLL4, PTPRK, SOX4, RUNX2), which further corroborated the multidirectional differentiation potential of cluster 4 (Table S1).	2.6	FOXD1 & ZFPM1 & NAPA & RUNX2 & CAMK2G & COL11A1 & NNAT & FGF18 & SOX18 & CCND1 & DLL4 & PTPRK & MEF2C & RXRG & RUNX3 & NDE1 & MDK & TCF4 & SFRP2 & HDAC9 & SOX4 & CAMK2 G	neuron & T cell & chondrocyte	Due to the importance of transcription factors ( TFs ) in regulating genomic DNA openness, modulating numerous immune responses, and developmental patterns ( 28, 29 ) , we then inferred information on the regulation of TFs behind each fibroblast subtypes ( Figure 2G ) .. The results revealed that activation of HOXB7, MEF2C, RUNX2, SP7, SOX4 was observed in cluster 4.	transcription factor-regulated network module mainly involve in chondrocyte development cell differentiation neuron differentiation t cell differentiation far corroborate multidirectional differentiation potential of cluster 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	FGF2, FGF7 and FGF10, as members of the fibroblast growth factor family, are involved in various biological processes, including embryonic development, cell growth, tissue repair, tumor growth and invasion, and have been reported to be critical targets in the fibrosis process (32, 33).	2.6	FGF2 & FGF7 & FGF10	fibroblast	The intercellular crosstalk in the PK group was primarily present between fibroblasts-fibroblasts.. Notably, among the growth factor-related cellular interactions, cluster 10 and cluster 3 fibroblasts in keloids were the major cellular sources of FGF signaling ( Figure 3B ) .	as member of fibroblast growth factor family involve in biological process include embryonic development cell growth tissue repair tumor growth invasion have report critical target in fibrosis process 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Macrophages were deactivated in inflammatory response, TNFα/NF-kB signaling pathway, IL6/JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway, but upregulated epithelial mesenchymal transition, TGF beta signaling pathway (Figure 4C), indicating that macrophages had M2 type macrophage characteristics that suppressed inflammation and promoted tissue damage repair (34).	2.6	IL6 & STAT3 & JAK2	epithelial mesenchymal & Macrophage & TNFα & macrophage	We proceeded to resolve cellular heterogeneity and investigated changes in the transcriptional profiles of mononuclear phagocytes and T cells.. Conventional dendritic cell type 2 ( cDC2 ) and macrophages were the predominant cell populations in the PK and K groups, which did not differ significantly in proportion ( Figures 4A, B ) .	macrophage deactivate in inflammatory response tnfα/nf-kb signaling pathway il6/jak2/stat3 signaling pathway upregulate epithelial mesenchymal transition tgf beta signaling pathway indicate macrophage have m2 type macrophage characteristic inflammation promote tissue damage repair 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	cDC2 activated oxidative phosphorylation, inflammatory response, TNF α/NF-kB signaling pathway and upregulated the expression of genes related to inflammatory response and antigen presentation, including EREG, LAMP3, CD1c, and CCR7 (Figures 4C, D).	2.0	LAMP3 & EREG & TNF & CCR7	dendritic cell type 2	Conventional dendritic cell type 2 ( cDC2 ) and macrophages were the predominant cell populations in the PK and K groups, which did not differ significantly in proportion ( Figures 4A, B ) .. Macrophages were deactivated in inflammatory response, TNFα or NF-kB signaling pathway, IL6 or JAK2 or STAT3 signaling pathway, but upregulated epithelial mesenchymal transition, TGF beta signaling pathway ( Figure 4C ) , indicating that macrophages had M2 type macrophage characteristics that suppressed inflammation and promoted tissue damage repair ( 34 ) .	conventional dendritic cell type activate oxidative phosphorylation inflammatory response α/nf-kb signaling pathway upregulate expression of gene related inflammatory response antigen presentation include cd1c 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	Subclustering analysis of T cells identified four T cell subpopulations, comprising naive T cells, CD4+ effector memory T cells (CD4Tem), CD8+ effector T cells (CD8Teff), and CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells (MAIT), with a reduced proportion of CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells in the PK group (Figures 5A, B).	2.0	CD4	naive T cell & keloid & CD4+ effector memory T cell & T cell subpopulation & CD8+ effector T cell & CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cell & T cell & CD8 + mucosa-associated invariant T cell & mucosa-associated invariant T cell	cDC2 activated oxidative phosphorylation, inflammatory response, TNF α or NF-kB signaling pathway and upregulated the expression of genes related to inflammatory response and antigen presentation, including EREG, LAMP3, CD1c, and CCR7 ( Figures 4C, D ) .. cDC2 and macrophages in the PK group significantly upregulated the expression of genes involved in apoptosis and angiogenesis ( Figure 4E ) .	subclustering analysis of t cell identify t cell subpopulation comprise naive t cell + effector memory t cell cd8 + effector t cell cd8 + mucosa-associated invariant t cell reduce proportion of cd8 + mucosa-associated invariant t cell in post-treatment keloid group group 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	In addition, the expression of immunomodulatory-related secretoglobin family members (SCGB2A2, SCGB1D2, SCGB1B2P) was upregulated in all three T cell subtypes (Figure 5E).	2.0	SCGB1B2P & SCGB2A2 & SCGB1D2	T cell subtype & T cell	MAIT cells were enriched in epithelial mesenchymal transition and hypoxia pathways ( Figure 5C ) , and MAIT cells have been reported to be the major lymphocyte population producing IL-17A, capable of initiating immune response and fibrosis formation in an IL-1, IL-18, and antigen-dependent manner ( 35, 36 ) .. Three major T cell subpopulations in the PK group upregulated the expression of genes associated with regulation of cell cycle, protein stabilization, apoptotic process, and regulation of autophagy compared to untreated keloids ( Figure 5D ) .	in addition expression of immunomodulatory-related secretoglobin family member upregulate in t cell subtype 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	(B) Descending clustering of T cells identified 4 distinct T cell subpopulations: naive T cells (NaiveT), CD4+ effector memory T cells (CD4Tem), CD8+ effector T cells (CD8Teff) and CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells (CD8MAIT).	2.0	CD4	naive T cell & CD4+ effector memory T cell & CD8+ effector T cell & CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cell & CD8Teff & T cell & T cell subpopulation	T cells were subdivided into different cell subpopulations..  ( A ) The proportion of the 4 T cell subpopulations in post-treated keloid ( PK ) , keloid ( K ) and normal skin ( N ) was displayed.	 descend clustering of t cell identify distinct t cell subpopulation naive t cell + effector memory t cell cd8 + effector t cell cd8 + mucosa-associated invariant t cell 
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	(D) Functional enrichment analysis of upregulated genes in CD4+ effector memory T cells, CD8+ effector T cells and CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells.	2.0	CD4	CD4 + effector memory T cell & CD4+ effector memory T cell & CD8 + effector T cell & CD8+ effector T cell & CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cell & CD8 + mucosa-associated invariant T cell	 ( B ) Descending clustering of T cells identified 4 distinct T cell subpopulations: naive T cells ( NaiveT ) , CD4+ effector memory T cells ( CD4Tem ) , CD8+ effector T cells ( CD8Teff ) and CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells ( CD8MAIT ) ..  ( C ) Heat map demonstrating differences in pathway activity between T cell subsets calculated based on GSVA scores.	 functional enrichment analysis of upregulate gene in + effector memory t cell cd8 + effector t cell cd8 + mucosa-associated invariant t cell
37275903	Deciphering the single-cell transcriptome network in keloids with intra-lesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide combined with 5-fluorouracil.	2023	Frontiers in immunology	human	KELOIDS	skin|dermi	(E) Genes differentially expressed in CD4+ effector memory T cells, CD8+ effector T cells and CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells in treated keloids compared to keloids with significance threshold set at P value < 0.05 and absolute value of log2 (Fold change) > 0.25.	2.0	CD4	CD4 + effector memory T cell & CD4+ effector memory T cell & CD8 + effector T cell & CD8+ effector T cell & CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cell & CD8 + mucosa-associated invariant T cell	 ( C ) Heat map demonstrating differences in pathway activity between T cell subsets calculated based on GSVA scores..  ( D ) Functional enrichment analysis of upregulated genes in CD4+ effector memory T cells, CD8+ effector T cells and CD8+ mucosa-associated invariant T cells.	 gene differentially express in + effector memory t cell cd8 + effector t cell cd8 + mucosa-associated invariant t cell in treated keloid compare keloid significance threshold set p value absolute value of log2 
